# Articles

Interesting Websites
ML project that turns drawings into reality: https://affinelayer.com/pixsrv/
ML project that trains models and outputs commands: https://experiments.withgoogle.com/teachable-machine


Built-in obsolescence 

Built-in obsolescence is the intentional design of products with a limited life span. 

Located in an old fire station, there exists an incandescent bulb that has been burning for over 100 years. If we have always had the ability to build such a light bulb, why are there not more like this one? One theory is that many of our products today are designed to become obsolete. During the industrial revolution light bulb manufacturers came together to form a cartel. This cartel allegedly agreed to manufacture light bulbs that expired after 1000 hours. This was advertised under the guise that light bulbs with such life spans were safer. That such light bulbs were less prone to exploding, catching fire, and omitting noxious gases (the gas inside the lightbulb is not pure oxygen. It’s a combination of gases that are designed to be inert). However, some people think that it was simply a way to encourage consumers to buy more bulbs. Essentially they believe that these light bulbs were built to become obsolete. On the other hand, another explanation might be that it is much cheaper to produce light bulbs which expire sooner and this is simply what people want. 

From a perspective of hindsight, it is easy to conjure up such conspiracies by looking at who benefits (quay bono). Apple has been accused for building phones that slow down over time (being incentivised by the sale of their hardware rather than software; in a court case accusing them of intentionally slowing down phones they responded by saying that it is to increase the life span of the batteries); IBM delayed the production of its new processor until their existing patent ran out so that people would buy their old one and then replace it when they made their new one; Ford motors is credited with the fast moving consumerism movement building cars that have marginal improvements (differnt shaped interriors, colours, and door handles. Upon purchase of a new ford vehicle, a brochure depicting the new and imporved models one year from now would be given to the consumer); and clothes that quickly become out of fashion, otherwise known as fast fashion. The imagination can easily be stretched to view capitalism as being responsible for the unnecessary waste from products built to last long enough to warrant satisfaction, but just short enough to make sustainable fortunes. And for those companies that don’t play ball, the risk of producing a product that is too good is a temporary existence. Pumpkin patch made clothes for kids that were “too good” such that once somebody had purchased them, no-one needed new ones. Now parents often get their babies second hand clothes instead of buying brand-new from pumpkin patch. Hand me downs could last generations. Go pro designed products that were so good that people needn’t buy the latest versions. Or maybe these companies just failed to innovate enough. 

Do companies intentionally build products that have an expiry date? Or more importantly, does our economic climate incentivise the production of products that are built to expire? Economic theory predicts that competition would result in people cheating the hold of a cartel in pursuit of their own self interest to take more of the market share. That if there were a demand for longer lasting light bulbs, companies would soon scurry to satisfy this demand. This would lead to the production of light bulbs that last much longer, just like the LED ones we have today. Competition has created technologies that overcome the obsolescence problem. Perhaps the problem of built-in obsolescence is not as bad as we thought when innovation through competition soon follows.

Is redundancy and waste just an inevitable aspect of innovation and free market capitalism? One theory that may help solve this problem is the release of ownership. Instead of buying products it might be better if we rented them. This would change the whole incentive structure that builds companies. For example, it wouuld be in a light bulb companies best interest to build bulbs that lasted the longest amount of time. They would also be more inclined to build products that were more recyclable at the end of their life span. One carpet company is already doing this. The rent tiled carpet so that when part of the carpet near the doorway needs replacing, only that part need be replaced. They also recycle the carpet and turn it into other patterns. Such examples of circular economy where the manufacturer internalises the externality of waste has exciting implications on global reductions in waste. 

Renting may not be the best for everything. We tend to look after our own car better than a rented one. But for products that incur no moral hazard (like light bulbs) perhaps renting is the next step to moving towards a more environmentally friendly economy. Another problem it might have is that it might decrease innovation as companies have fewer incentives to do so. Products aren’t mutating as much as they would because they are living longer lives. Whatever the solution may be, it would seem like with most complex issues, the optimum lies somewhere inbetween.

click <a href="https://twitter.com/5impkin/status/1121549499300585473">here</a> to engage in the descussion

# Profile Links
<a href="https://www.linkedin.com/in/liamsimpkin/">Linkedin</a>
<a href="https://github.com/ljsimpkin">Github</a>
<a href="https://twitter.com/5impkin">Twitter</a>

